Something else is essential. We need something more than theories. We
need an intimate contact with the facts. One must make the decisive
experiment upon oneself. It is necessary that on coming out of a dream,
since we cannot analyze ourselves in the dream itself, we should watch
the transition from sleeping to waking, follow upon the transition as
closely as possible, and try to express by words what we experience in
this passage. This is very difficult, but may be accomplished by forcing
the attention. Permit, then, the writer to take an example from his own
personal experience, and to tell of a recent dream as well as what was
accomplished on coming out of the dream.

Now the dreamer dreamed that he was speaking before an assembly, that he
was making a political speech before a political assembly. Then in the
midst of the auditorium a murmur rose. The murmur augmented; it became a
muttering. Then it became a roar, a frightful tumult, and finally there
resounded from all parts timed to a uniform rhythm the cries, "Out!
Out!" At that moment he wakened. A dog was baying in a neighboring
garden, and with each one of his "Wow-wows" one of the cries of "Out!
Out!" seemed to be identical. Well, here was the infinitesimal moment
which it is necessary to seize.

The waking ego, just reappearing, should turn to the dreaming ego, which
is still there, and, during some instants at least, hold it without
letting it go. "I have caught you at it! You thought it was a crowd
shouting and it was a dog barking. Now, I shall not let go of you until
you tell me just what you were doing!" To which the dreaming ego would
answer, "I was doing nothing; and this is just where you and I differ
from one another. You imagine that in order to hear a dog barking, and
to know that it is a dog that barks, you have nothing to do. That is a
great mistake. You accomplish, without suspecting it, a considerable
effort. You take your entire memory, all your accumulated experience,
and you bring this formidable mass of memories to converge upon a
single point, in such a way as to insert exactly in the sounds you heard
that one of your memories which is the most capable of being adapted to
it. Nay, you must obtain a perfect adherence, for between the memory
that you evoke and the crude sensation that you perceive there must not
be the least discrepancy; otherwise you would be just dreaming. This
adjustment you can only obtain by an effort of the memory and an effort
of the perception, just as the tailor who is trying on a new coat pulls
together the pieces of cloth that he adjusts to the shape of your body
in order to pin them. You exert, then, continually, every moment of the
day, an enormous effort. Your life in a waking state is a life of labor,
even when you think you are doing nothing, for at every minute you have
to choose and every minute exclude. You choose among your sensations,
since you reject from your consciousness a thousand subjective
sensations which come back in the night when you sleep. You choose, and
with extreme precision and delicacy, among your memories, since you
reject all that do not exactly suit your present state. This choice
which you continually accomplish, this adaptation, ceaselessly renewed,
is the first and most essential condition of what is called common
sense. But all this keeps you in a state of uninterrupted tension. You
do not feel it at the moment, any more than you feel the pressure of the
atmosphere, but it fatigues you in the long run. Common sense is very
fatiguing.

"So, I repeat, I differ from you precisely in that I do nothing. The
effort that you give without cessation I simply abstain from giving. In
place of attaching myself to life, I detach myself from it. Everything
has become indifferent to me. I have become disinterested in everything.
To sleep is to become disinterested. One sleeps to the exact extent to
which he becomes disinterested. A mother who sleeps by the side of her
child will not stir at the sound of thunder, but the sigh of the child
will wake her. Does she really sleep in regard to her child? We do not
sleep in regard to what continues to interest us.

"You ask me what it is that I do when I dream? I will tell you what you
do when you are awake. You take me, the me of dreams, me the totality of
your past, and you force me, by making me smaller and smaller, to fit
into the little circle that you trace around your present action. That
is what it is to be awake. That is what it is to live the normal
psychical life. It is to battle. It is to will. As for the dream, have
you really any need that I should explain it? It is the state into which
you naturally fall when you let yourself go, when you no longer have the
power to concentrate yourself upon a single point, when you have ceased
to will. What needs much more to be explained is the marvelous mechanism
by which at any moment your will obtains instantly, and almost
unconsciously, the concentration of all that you have within you upon
one and the same point, the point that interests you. But to explain
this is the task of normal psychology, of the psychology of waking, for
willing and waking are one and the same thing."

This is what the dreaming ego would say. And it would tell us a great
many other things still if we could let it talk freely. But let us sum
up briefly the essential difference which separates a dream from the
waking state. In the dream the same faculties are exercised as during
waking, but they are in a state of tension in the one case, and of
relaxation in the other. The dream consists of the entire mental life
minus the tension, the effort and the bodily movement. We perceive
still, we remember still, we reason still. All this can abound in the
dream; for abundance, in the domain of the mind, does not mean effort.
What requires an effort is the precision of adjustment. To connect the
sound of a barking dog with the memory of a crowd that murmurs and
shouts requires no effort. But in order that this sound should be
perceived as the barking of a dog, a positive effort must be made. It is
this force that the dreamer lacks. It is by that, and by that alone,
that he is distinguished from the waking man.

From this essential difference can be drawn a great many others. We can
come to understand the chief characteristics of the dream. But I can
only outline the scheme of this study. It depends especially upon three
points, which are: the incoherence of dreams, the abolition of the sense
of duration that often appears to be manifested in dreams, and, finally,
the order in which the memories present themselves to the dreamer,
contending for the sensations present where they are to be embodied.

The incoherence of the dream seems to me easy enough to explain. As it
is characteristic of the dream not to demand a complete adjustment
between the memory image and the sensation, but, on the contrary, to
allow some play between them, very different memories can suit the same
sensation. For example, there may be in the field of vision a green spot
with white points. This might be a lawn spangled with white flowers. It
might be a billiard-table with its balls. It might be a host of other
things besides. These different memory images, all capable of utilizing
the same sensation, chase after it. Sometimes they attain it, one after
the other. And so the lawn becomes a billiard-table, and we watch these
extraordinary transformations. Often it is at the same time, and
altogether that these memory images join the sensation, and then the
lawn will be a billiard-table. From this come those absurd dreams where
an object remains as it is and at the same time becomes something else.
As I have just said, the mind, confronted by these absurd visions, seeks
an explanation and often thereby aggravates the incoherence.

As for the abolition of the sense of time in many of our dreams, that is
another effect of the same cause. In a few seconds a dream can present
to us a series of events which will occupy, in the waking state, entire
days. You know the example cited by M. Maury: it has become classic, and
although it has been contested of late, I regard it as probable, because
of the great number of analogous observations that I found scattered
through the literature of dreams. But this precipitation of the images
is not at all mysterious. When we are awake we live a life in common
with our fellows. Our attention to this external and social life is the
great regulator of the succession of our internal states. It is like
the balance wheel of a watch, which moderates and cuts into regular
sections the undivided, almost instantaneous tension of the spring. It
is this balance wheel which is lacking in the dream. Acceleration is no
more than abundance a sign of force in the domain of the mind. It is, I
repeat, the precision of adjustment that requires effort, and this is
exactly what the dreamer lacks. He is no longer capable of that
attention to life which is necessary in order that the inner may be
regulated by the outer, and that the internal duration fit exactly into
the general duration of things.

It remains now to explain how the peculiar relaxation of the mind in the
dream accounts for the preference given by the dreamer to one memory
image rather than others, equally capable of being inserted into the
actual sensations. There is a current prejudice to the effect that we
dream mostly about the events which have especially preoccupied us
during the day. This is sometimes true. But when the psychological life
of the waking state thus prolongs itself into sleep, it is because we
hardly sleep. A sleep filled with dreams of this kind would be a sleep
from which we come out quite fatigued. In normal sleep our dreams
concern themselves rather, other things being equal, with the thoughts
which we have passed through rapidly or upon objects which we have
perceived almost without paying attention to them. If we dream about
events of the same day, it is the most insignificant facts, and not the
most important, which have the best chance of reappearing.

I agree entirely on this point with the observation of W. Robert, of
Delage and of Freud. I was in the street, I was waiting for a
street-car, I stood beside the track and did not run the least risk. But
if, at the moment when the street-car passed, the idea of possible
danger had crossed my mind or even if my body had instinctively recoiled
without my having been conscious of feeling any fear, I might dream that
night that the car had run over my body. I watch at the bedside of an
invalid whose condition is hopeless. If at any moment, perhaps without
even being aware of it, I had hoped against hope, I might dream that the
invalid was cured. I should dream of the cure, in any case, more
probably than that I should dream of the disease. In short, the events
which reappear by preference in the dream are those of which we have
thought most distractedly. What is there astonishing about that? The ego
of the dream is an ego that is relaxed; the memories which it gathers
most readily are the memories of relaxation and distraction, those which
do not bear the mark of effort.

It is true that in very profound slumber the law that regulates the
reappearance of memories may be very different. We know almost nothing
of this profound slumber. The dreams which fill it are, as a general
rule, the dreams which we forget. Sometimes, nevertheless, we recover
something of them. And then it is a very peculiar feeling, strange,
indescribable, that we experience. It seems to us that we have returned
from afar in space and afar in time. These are doubtless very old
scenes, scenes of youth or infancy that we live over then in all their
details, with a mood which colors them with that fresh sensation of
infancy and youth that we seek vainly to revive when awake.

It is upon this profound slumber that psychology ought to direct its
efforts, not only to study the mechanism of unconscious memory, but to
examine the more mysterious phenomena which are raised by "psychical
research." I do not dare express an opinion upon phenomena of this
class, but I cannot avoid attaching some importance to the observations
gathered by so rigorous a method and with such indefatigable zeal by the
Society for Psychical Research. If telepathy influences our dreams, it
is quite likely that in this profound slumber it would have the greatest
chance to manifest itself. But I repeat, I cannot express an opinion
upon this point. I have gone forward with you as far as I can; I stop
upon the threshold of the mystery. To explore the most secret depths of
the unconscious, to labor in what I have just called the subsoil of
consciousness, that will be the principal task of psychology in the
century which is opening. I do not doubt that wonderful discoveries
await it there, as important perhaps as have been in the preceding
centuries the discoveries of the physical and natural sciences. That at
least is the promise which I make for it, that is the wish that in
closing I have for it.


